=== SOURCE: integrating_current_sensing.pdf ===
=== PAGES: 3 ===


--- PAGE 1 ---
Application Brief
Integrating the Current Sensing Signal Path
Scott Hill
Current Sensing Products
Current measurements are used in electronic systems 
to provide feedback verifying operation is within 
acceptable margins and to detect potential fault 
conditions. Analyzing a system’s current level can 
diagnose unintended or unexpected operating modes 
allowing for adjustments to be made to improve 
reliability or to protect the system components from 
damage.
Current is a signal that is difficult to measure directly. 
However, there are several measurement methods 
that are capable of measuring the effect of flowing 
current. Current passing through a wire produces 
a magnetic field that can be detected by magnetic 
sensors (hall-effect and fluxgate for example). Current 
measurements can also be made by measuring the 
voltage developed across a resistor as current passes 
through. This type of resistor is called a current 
sensing, or shunt, resistor.
For current ranges reaching up to 100 amps on 
voltage rails below 100 volts, measuring current with 
shunt resistors are typically preferred. The shunt 
resistor approach commonly provides a physically 
smaller, more accurate and temperature stable 
measurement compared to a magnetic solution.
For the system’s current information to be evaluated 
and analyzed, it must be digitized and sent to 
the system controller. There are many methods 
for measuring and converting the signal developed 
across the shunt resistor. The most common 
approach involves using an analog front-end to 
convert the current sensing resistor’s differential 
signal to a single-ended signal. This single-ended 
signal is then connected to an analog to 
digital converter (ADC) that is connected to a 
microcontroller. Figure 1 illustrates the current sensing 
signal chain.
RSHUNT
SUPPLY
POWER 
SUPPLY
LOAD
CONTROLLER
ADC
REF
REF
-
+
Figure 1. Current Sensing Signal Path
To optimize the current sensing signal chain, the 
shunt resistor value and amplifier gain must be 
appropriately selected for the current range and full-
scale input range of the ADC. The selection of the 
shunt resistor is based on a compromise between 
measurement accuracy and power dissipation across 
the shunt resistor. A large value resistor will develop 
a larger differential voltage as the current passes 
through. The measurement errors will be smaller due 
to the fixed amplifier offset voltage. However, the 
larger signal creates a larger power dissipation across 
the shunt resistor (P = I2R). A smaller shunt resistor 
develops a smaller drop across the shunt resistor 
reducing the power dissipation requirements but also 
increases the measurement errors as the amplifier’s 
fixed offset errors become a larger percentage of the 
signal.
The amplifier gain is selected to ensure that the 
amplifier’s output signal will not exceed the ADCs full-
scale input range at the full-scale input current level.
The INA210 is a dedicated current sense amplifier 
that integrates the external gain setting resistors as 
shown in Figure 2. Bringing these gain resistors 
internal to the device allows for increased matching 
and temperature drift stability compared to typical 
external gain setting resistors. Space saving QFN 
packages significantly reduce the board space 
requirements of an operational amplifier and external 
gain resistors. Current sense amplifiers are commonly 
available in multiple fixed gain levels to better 
optimize the pairing with shunt resistor values based 
on the input current and ADC full-scale input ranges.
VS = 
2.7V to 26V
VCM = 
0V to 26V
VOUT
LOAD
RSHUNT
-
+
INA210
Figure 2. INA210: Current Sensing Amplifier
www.ti.com
SBOA167B – DECEMBER 2016 – REVISED SEPTEMBER 2021
Submit Document Feedback
Integrating the Current Sensing Signal Path
1
Copyright © 2021 Texas Instruments Incorporated

--- PAGE 2 ---
Figure 1 shows the operational amplifier measuring 
the differential voltage developed across the shunt 
resistor and sending the amplified signal to the 
single ended ADC. A fully differential input ADC can 
monitor the differential voltage directly across the 
shunt resistor. One drawback to using a typical ADC 
is reduced input range used. The signal developed 
across a shunt resistor will be small to limit the power 
dissipation requirements of this component. Lower 
ADC resolutions will also impact the small signal 
measurement accuracy.
The ADC reference will also be an additional error 
source that must be evaluated in this signal path. A 
typical ADC will feature an input range that is based 
on the converter's reference voltage. The actual 
reference voltage range varies from device to device 
but is typically in the 2 V to 5 V range. The LSB 
(least significant bit) is based on the full-scale range 
and resolution of the converter. For example, a 16-bit 
converter with a full-scale input range of 2.5 V, the 
LSB value is roughly 38 µV.
The INA226 is a specialized ADC designed 
specifically for bi-directional current sensing 
applications. Unlike typical ADCs, this 16-bit converter 
features a full-scale input range of +/- 80 mV 
eliminating the need to amplify the input signal 
to maximize the ADC's full-scale input range. The 
INA226 is able to accurately measure small shunt 
voltages based on the device's maximum input offset 
voltage of 10 µV and an LSB size of 2.5 µV. The 
INA226 provides 15 times more resolution than the 
equivalent standard 16-bit ADC with a full-scale input 
range of 2.5 V. The specialization of the INA226 
makes this device ideal for directly monitoring the 
voltage drop across the current sensing resistor as 
shown in Figure 3.
LOAD
RSHUNT
INA226
Alert
I2C
Interface
GPIO
CONTROlLER
SCL
SDA
16-Bit
ADC
VCM = 
0V to 36V
Supply
2.7V to 5.5V
Figure 3. Digital Current/Power Monitor
In addition to the ability to directly measure voltage 
developed across the shunt resistor as current passes 
through, the INA226 can also measure the common-
mode voltage. The INA226 has an input multiplexer 
allowing the ADC input circuitry to switch between 
the differential shunt voltage measurement and the 
single-ended bus voltage measurement.
The current sensing resistor value present in the 
system can be programmed into a configuration 
register on the INA226. Based on this current 
sensing resistor value and the measured shunt 
voltage, on-chip calculations convert of the shunt 
voltage back to current and can provide a direct 
readout of the corresponding power level of 
the system. Performing these calculations on-chip 
reduces processor resources that would normally be 
required to convert this information.
Alternate Device Recommendations
For applications with lower performance 
requirements, using the INA199 still takes advantage 
of the benefits of the dedicated current sense 
amplifier. For applications implementing over-current 
detection, the INA301 features an integrated 
comparator to allow for on-chip over-current detection 
as fast as 1µs. For applications with lower 
performance requirements, using the INA219 is able 
to take advantage of the specialized current sensing 
ADC.
Table 1. Alternative Device Recommendations
Device
Optimized Parameter
Performance Trade-Off
INA199
Lower Cost
Higher VOS and Gain Error
INA301
Signal Bandwidth, On-Board Comparator
Larger Package: MSOP-8
INA219
Smaller Package Digital Monitor, Lower Cost
Higher VOS and Gain Error
INA190
More Accurate
N/A
Table 2. Related TI Application Briefs
SBOA162
Measuring Current To Detect Out-of-Range Conditions
SBOA165
Precision Current Measurement On High Voltage Power Rail
SBOA160
High Precision, Low-Drift In-Line Motor Current Measurements
SBOA161
Low-Drift, Low-Side Current Measurements for Three-Phase Systems
www.ti.com
2
Integrating the Current Sensing Signal Path
SBOA167B – DECEMBER 2016 – REVISED SEPTEMBER 2021
Submit Document Feedback
Copyright © 2021 Texas Instruments Incorporated

--- PAGE 3 ---
IMPORTANT NOTICE AND DISCLAIMER
TI PROVIDES TECHNICAL AND RELIABILITY DATA (INCLUDING DATA SHEETS), DESIGN RESOURCES (INCLUDING REFERENCE 
DESIGNS), APPLICATION OR OTHER DESIGN ADVICE, WEB TOOLS, SAFETY INFORMATION, AND OTHER RESOURCES “AS IS” 
AND WITH ALL FAULTS, AND DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS AND IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY 
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT OF THIRD 
PARTY INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS.
These resources are intended for skilled developers designing with TI products. You are solely responsible for (1) selecting the appropriate 
TI products for your application, (2) designing, validating and testing your application, and (3) ensuring your application meets applicable 
standards, and any other safety, security, regulatory or other requirements.
These resources are subject to change without notice. TI grants you permission to use these resources only for development of an 
application that uses the TI products described in the resource. Other reproduction and display of these resources is prohibited. No license 
is granted to any other TI intellectual property right or to any third party intellectual property right. TI disclaims responsibility for, and you 
will fully indemnify TI and its representatives against, any claims, damages, costs, losses, and liabilities arising out of your use of these 
resources.
TI’s products are provided subject to TI’s Terms of Sale or other applicable terms available either on ti.com or provided in conjunction with 
such TI products. TI’s provision of these resources does not expand or otherwise alter TI’s applicable warranties or warranty disclaimers for 
TI products.
TI objects to and rejects any additional or different terms you may have proposed. IMPORTANT NOTICE
Mailing Address: Texas Instruments, Post Office Box 655303, Dallas, Texas 75265
Copyright © 2022, Texas Instruments Incorporated
