=== SOURCE: integrated_current_sensing_adc.pdf ===
=== PAGES: 4 ===


--- PAGE 1 ---
Application Brief
Integrated, Current Sensing Analog-to-Digital Converter
Scott Hill
Current Sensing Products
The signal chain path for measuring current is 
typically consistent from system to system. Whether 
current is measured in a computer, automobile or 
motor, the common functional blocks used are found 
in nearly all equipment.
The interface to a real world element such as light, 
temperature or current in this case, requires a sensor 
to convert the signal to a proportional value (voltage 
or current) that can be more easily measured. There 
are a several sensors that use magnetic field sensing 
for detecting the effects of current flow. These can 
be very effective for detecting very large currents or 
when isolated measurements are required. The most 
common sensor for measuring current is a current 
sensing, or shunt, resistor. Placing this component in 
series with the current being measured develops a 
proportional differential voltage as the current passes 
through the resistor.
The remaining blocks in the signal path are selected 
based on how this measured current information is 
to be used by the system. There are several blocks 
that are common and found in most applications as 
shown in Figure 1. These blocks consist of an analog 
front end (AFE) to amplify a small signal from the 
sensor, an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) to digitize 
the amplified signal from the sensor, and a processor 
to allow for the sensor information to be analyzed so 
the system can respond accordingly to the measured 
current level.
RSHUNT
Power 
Supply
Load
OSC
Controller
-
+
AFE
ADC
REF
Figure 1. Current Sensing Signal Chain
One requirement for the AFE is allow for direct 
interface to the differential signal developed across 
the sense resistor. A single-ended output for 
the AFE simplifies the interface to the following 
ADC. Operational amplifiers in differential amplifier 
configurations are common for this functional 
requirement. Dedicated current sense amplifiers, 
INA210 for example, feature integrated gain setting 
components and are designed specifically for this 
type of application. The INA210 has the capability to 
accurately measure very small signals reducing the 
power dissipation requirement of the sensing resistor.
The next signal chain block is the ADC which is 
present to digitize the amplified sensor signal. This 
device can require additional external components 
(reference, oscillator) for more precise measurement 
capability. Similarly to the AFE, there are various 
options available for the ADC block. Stand-alone 
converters with the onboard references and oscillators 
are available as well as processors featuring onboard 
ADC channels.
Both integrated and discrete ADC blocks have their 
benefits as well as limitations. Fewer components 
on the board is one obvious advantage with the 
ADC being integrated into the processor. Existing 
instruction sets for the onboard ADC channels further 
reduces the requirement for additional software 
to be written to support a stand-alone ADC. 
However, silicon process nodes for digital controllers 
frequently are less optimized for precision analog, 
limiting the performance capability of the onboard 
converter. Discrete analog-to-digital converters have 
an advantage of allowing device selection based on 
optimized performance attributes such as resolution, 
noise or conversion speed.
A variation in this signal chain is to use an ADC 
to measure directly across the current sensing 
resistor eliminating the current sense amplifier 
entirely. A standard converter would have challenges 
in replacing the AFE and measuring the shunt 
voltage directly. One challenge is the large full-scale 
range of the ADC. Without the amplification of the 
sense resistor's voltage drop, either the full-range 
of the ADC cannot be fully utilized or a larger 
voltage drop will be needed across the resistor. 
A large voltage drop will result in a larger power 
dissipation across the sensing resistor. There are 
ADCs available with modified input ranges designed 
for measuring smaller signals directly which can 
allow for direct measurement of shunt voltages. 
www.ti.com
SBOA179A – DECEMBER 2016 – REVISED SEPTEMBER 2021
Submit Document Feedback
Integrated, Current Sensing Analog-to-Digital Converter
1
Copyright © 2021 Texas Instruments Incorporated

--- PAGE 2 ---
An internal programmable gain amplifier (PGA) is 
typically integrated in these devices to leverage the 
full-scale range of the ADC.
A limitation these small signal converters have is their 
limited common-mode input voltage range. These 
ADCs have input voltage ranges that are limited 
by their supply voltage which typically range from 
3 V to 5.5 V based on the core processor voltage 
being supported. The INA226, shown in Figure 2, is 
a current sensing specific analog-to-digital converter 
that solves this common-mode limitation. This device 
features a 16-bit delta-sigma core and can monitor 
small differential shunt voltages on common-mode 
voltage rails as high as 36 V while being powered off 
a supply voltage that can range from 2.7 V to 5.5 V.
Power Supply 
(0V to 36V)
RSHUNT
I2C
Interface
Shunt 
Voltage
Bus 
Voltage
Shunt 
Bus 
Current
Power
Alert
16-Bit 
ADC
INA226
Load
Figure 2. INA226, Precision Current, Voltage, 
Power Sensing ADC
Similar to the ADCs with modified small input range 
capability, the INA226 has a full-scale input range of 
about 80 mV enabling the device to measure directly 
across the current sensing resistor. The INA226 has 
the ability to very accurately resolve small current 
variations with an LSB step size of 2.5 μV and 
a maximum input offset voltage of 10 μV. A 0.1-
μV/°C offset drift ensures the measurement accuracy 
remains high with only an additional 12.5 μV of offset 
induced at temperatures as high as 125°C. A 0.1% 
maximum gain error also enables the measurement 
accuracy to remain high at the full-scale signal levels 
as well.
While the INA226 is able to accurately measure small 
shunt voltages this component has been designed 
with additional functionality useful for current sensing 
applications. This device features an internal register 
that is user-programmable with the specific value 
of the current sensing resistor that is present on 
the PCB. Having the value of the current sensing 
resistor allows the INA226 to directly convert the 
shunt voltage measured every conversion to the 
corresponding current value and stores this to an 
additional output register. The INA226 also features 
an internal multiplexer allowing the device to switch 
from a differential input measurement to a single 
ended voltage configuration to allow for measurement 
of the common-mode voltage directly. The voltage 
measurement, along with the previously measured 
shunt voltage and corresponding current calculation, 
allows the device the capability of computing power. 
The device stores this power calculation and provides 
this value along with the shunt voltage, current and 
common-mode voltage information to the processor 
over the two-wire serial bus.
In addition to the on-chip calculations of current and 
power, the INA226 features a programmable alert 
register that allows the device to compare each 
conversion value to a defined limit to determine 
if an out-of-range condition has occurred. This 
alert monitor can be configured to measure out-of-
range conditions such as overcurrent, overvoltage, or 
overpower. The device also includes programmable 
signal averaging to further improve measurement 
accuracy.
The INA226 is optimized to support precision current 
measurements. The additional features included in 
this device provide the capability of supporting the 
signal management and monitoring needed in this 
current measurement function reducing the burden on 
the system processor.
www.ti.com
2
Integrated, Current Sensing Analog-to-Digital Converter
SBOA179A – DECEMBER 2016 – REVISED SEPTEMBER 2021
Submit Document Feedback
Copyright © 2021 Texas Instruments Incorporated

--- PAGE 3 ---
Alternate Device Recommendations
For applications with lower performance 
requirements, using the INA234 still leverages 
the benefits of the dedicated current sensing 
analog-to-digital converter. For additional precision 
measurement capability where currents being 
measured are less than 15 A, the INA260 provides 
similar functionality to the INA226 while also 
featuring a precision 2-mΩ integrated current sensing 
resistor inside the package. For applications requiring 
significantly higher common-mode voltage capability, 
the AMC1305 provides onboard isolation and is 
capable of supporting working voltages as high as 1.5 
kV DC and handling peak transients as high as 7 kV. 
For applications with lower performance requirements 
for the AFE, use the INA210 to take advantage of the 
benefits of a dedicated current sense amplifier.
Table 1. Alternative Device Recommendations
Device
Optimized Parameters
Performance Trade-Off
INA234
Lower Cost
Higher VOS & Gain Error, 
Lower VCM Range
INA260
Lower System Level Gain 
Error & Offset
Larger Package: 
TSSOP-16
AMC1305
Isolated Measurement, 
Higher Signal Bandwidth
Higher Cost, Higher VOS 
& Gain Error
INA210
Lower Cost
Higher VOS & Gain Error
Table 2. Adjacent Tech Notes
SBOA162
Measuring Current To Detect Out-of-
Range Conditions
SBOA165
Precision Current Measurement On High 
Voltage Power Rail
SBOA167
Integrating The Current Sensing Signal 
Path
SBOA170
Integrating the Current Sensing Resistor
www.ti.com
SBOA179A – DECEMBER 2016 – REVISED SEPTEMBER 2021
Submit Document Feedback
Integrated, Current Sensing Analog-to-Digital Converter
3
Copyright © 2021 Texas Instruments Incorporated

--- PAGE 4 ---
IMPORTANT NOTICE AND DISCLAIMER
TI PROVIDES TECHNICAL AND RELIABILITY DATA (INCLUDING DATA SHEETS), DESIGN RESOURCES (INCLUDING REFERENCE 
DESIGNS), APPLICATION OR OTHER DESIGN ADVICE, WEB TOOLS, SAFETY INFORMATION, AND OTHER RESOURCES “AS IS” 
AND WITH ALL FAULTS, AND DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS AND IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY 
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT OF THIRD 
PARTY INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS.
These resources are intended for skilled developers designing with TI products. You are solely responsible for (1) selecting the appropriate 
TI products for your application, (2) designing, validating and testing your application, and (3) ensuring your application meets applicable 
standards, and any other safety, security, regulatory or other requirements.
These resources are subject to change without notice. TI grants you permission to use these resources only for development of an 
application that uses the TI products described in the resource. Other reproduction and display of these resources is prohibited. No license 
is granted to any other TI intellectual property right or to any third party intellectual property right. TI disclaims responsibility for, and you 
will fully indemnify TI and its representatives against, any claims, damages, costs, losses, and liabilities arising out of your use of these 
resources.
TI’s products are provided subject to TI’s Terms of Sale or other applicable terms available either on ti.com or provided in conjunction with 
such TI products. TI’s provision of these resources does not expand or otherwise alter TI’s applicable warranties or warranty disclaimers for 
TI products.
TI objects to and rejects any additional or different terms you may have proposed. IMPORTANT NOTICE
Mailing Address: Texas Instruments, Post Office Box 655303, Dallas, Texas 75265
Copyright © 2022, Texas Instruments Incorporated
