=== SOURCE: improving_power_amplifier.pdf ===
=== PAGES: 3 ===


--- PAGE 1 ---
Application Brief
Improving Power Amplifier Efficiency With
Current Monitors
Kyle R. Stone
This application brief addresses a few of the current 
shunt monitor (CSM) implementations used with 
power amplifier stages in wireless infrastructure. With 
each particular implementation, this note presents the 
trade-offs as well as recommends a device relevant 
for the approach.
PA Feedback
Delving past the abstraction of antennas, transmitters, 
and receivers of an active antenna system (AAS) 
or remote radio unit (RRU) can yield systems of 
amplifiers, microprocessors, multiplexors, DACs, and 
sensors. Of these elements, one of the crucial 
elements impacting power consumption is the power 
amplifier stage transmitting out to the users on the 
network. This power amplifier stage can consist of a 
Doherty amplifier with a predriver, which can further 
be reduced down to some LDMOS or GaN transistors 
configured into class B, AB, and C amplifiers.
Controlling the bias point of the transistors in a 
PA stage improves the efficiency of the system. An 
open-loop, fixed-control voltage for the bias neglects 
the impact of supply variations on the drain side, 
device aging, and transconductance fluctuations due 
to temperature changes from heat dissipation and 
ambient temperature swings. Consequently, feedback 
facilitating dynamic control to adjust the PA transistors 
bias points is required, as Figure 1 shows. Depending 
on the designer’s constraints in board space, cost, 
precision, number of antennas, and so forth, the 
best method for the dynamic control can vary. Many 
approaches include a current shunt monitor (CSM) to 
serve as part of the feedback chain to adjust the bias 
and thereby improve efficiency. This note presents 
three general approaches, with each subsequent 
implementation having greater control on the bias 
point and related efficiency of the PA stage.
DAC
DAC
DAC
PA
Stage
DAC
DAC
DAC
PA
Stage
VDD
Feedback 
Stage
Figure 1. PA Stages with Feedback
Factory Calibration
A single factory calibration with a generated look-
table is one way to control a PA stage. During 
calibration, a PA is subjected to a range of bias 
voltages or temperatures, while an on or off board 
CSM (as Figure 2 shows), monitors the load. From 
the load measurements, a bias value or group of 
bias values can be programmed into a look-up table 
that a DAC uses later to control the bias. This 
process is then extended to each individual PA in 
the system. Consequently, the number of CSMs 
depends on how much calibration time in production 
can be afforded and BOM cost. After production, an 
off-board or shorted sensor saves power otherwise 
lost across the shunt. Additionally, if temperature 
sensors are included in the feedback with the look-up 
table, regions of PA stages can be adjusted relatively 
quickly according to the temperature drift, and a 
result, improves efficiency. As the factory calibration 
emphasizes cost for a relatively high common-mode, 
high-side measurement, consider devices such as the 
INA290 or INA186.
SPACER
SPACER
SPACER
SPACER
www.ti.com
SBOA369B – DECEMBER 2019 – REVISED JULY 2023
Submit Document Feedback
Improving Power Amplifier Efficiency With
Current Monitors
1
Copyright © 2023 Texas Instruments Incorporated

--- PAGE 2 ---
DAC
DAC
VDD
+
t
Current 
shunt
Monitor
Microcontroller
PA Stages
PA Stages
PA 
Stages
DAC
Temp
Sensor
Figure 2. Current Sense Feedback
Periodic Calibration
Although the factory calibration approach improves 
efficiency over a fixed-bias voltage, the approach 
neglects supply variation, which can immediately 
affect the bias and device aging, which gradually 
affects the bias. To overcome these shortcomings, the 
system can be designed to periodically power off and 
recalibrate. From periodic calibration, adjustments are 
made to the look-up table as the PAs age, the 
system switches between batteries and solar power, 
or when the supply begins to droop. With this tighter 
control is the option of current monitoring and voltage 
monitoring all integrated into one package, such as in 
the INA226 or INA228 devices. For more integration, 
EZShunt™ technology integrates the shunt resistor 
directly into the leadframe, which generally reduces 
the design size and procurement effort. Devices 
such as the INA700 or INA780A are equipped with 
the EZShunt™ technology with a 2-mΩ or 400-μΩ 
leadframe resistance respectively. Periodic calibration 
requires the shunt resistor to be permanently fixed 
on the board, resulting in constant losses across 
the shunt. To minimize the losses, a part with low 
input offset such as the INA190 or INA290 can be 
used, as the lower offset permits a smaller shunt 
for improved accuracy. Alternatively, a current sensor 
such as the TMCS1123 with an isolated hall sensor 
allows for a high common-mode with minimal losses 
across the 0.67-mΩ leadframe. Aside from the shunt 
dissipation, the other concern for periodic calibration 
is the compromise between added programming and 
monitor count that is required to provide minimal 
transmission interruption.
Real-Time Sensing
While the periodic calibration does address known 
issues with aging and temperature that a designer can 
anticipate, the calibration does not have immediate 
dynamic response for unexpected conditions. 
Continuous current monitoring is sometimes required 
for critical applications in which tighter control is 
required. This method allows for quick adjustments to 
any PA stage for any possible changes in operating 
conditions. As continuous monitoring requires CSMs 
for all PA stages, a multichannel device such as the 
INA2290 or INA4181 can be considered to save board 
space. For further integration, board savings, and 
added system protection, devices such as INA381 
and INA310A with integrated comparators can be 
used for overcurrent conditions.
+
t
VDD
MUX
Bus
Monitor
Current
Monitor
OC
Protection
PA
Load
Microcontroller
DAC
DAC
DAC
REF
Figure 3. Bus Voltage, Current, and OC Feedback
Table 1. CSM Method Comparison
Approach
BOM 
Count
Control
Integrate 
Bus 
Monitor
Integrate 
OC
Shunt 
Loss
Factory 
Calibration
Low
Loose
No
No
Never
Periodic 
Calibration
Medium
Tighter
Yes
No
Always
Real-time 
Sensing
High
Tightest
Yes
Yes
Always
Table 2. Alternative Device Recommendations
Device
Characteristics
INA310A
Common mode range –4 V to 110 V; 
comparator.
INA226
Common mode range –0.3 V to 36 V; 16-bit 
delta sigma ADC.
INA290
Common mode range 2.7 V to 120 V, 1.1 
MHz, small (SC-70) package.
Table 3. Related TI Application Briefs
Literature Number
Title
SBOA366
Current Sensing Applications in 
Communication Infrastructure Equipment
SLPA013
Hybrid Battery Charger With Load Control 
for Telecom Equipment
www.ti.com
2
Improving Power Amplifier Efficiency With
Current Monitors
SBOA369B – DECEMBER 2019 – REVISED JULY 2023
Submit Document Feedback
Copyright © 2023 Texas Instruments Incorporated

--- PAGE 3 ---
IMPORTANT NOTICE AND DISCLAIMER
TI PROVIDES TECHNICAL AND RELIABILITY DATA (INCLUDING DATA SHEETS), DESIGN RESOURCES (INCLUDING REFERENCE 
DESIGNS), APPLICATION OR OTHER DESIGN ADVICE, WEB TOOLS, SAFETY INFORMATION, AND OTHER RESOURCES “AS IS” 
AND WITH ALL FAULTS, AND DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS AND IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY 
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT OF THIRD 
PARTY INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS.
These resources are intended for skilled developers designing with TI products. You are solely responsible for (1) selecting the appropriate 
TI products for your application, (2) designing, validating and testing your application, and (3) ensuring your application meets applicable 
standards, and any other safety, security, regulatory or other requirements.
These resources are subject to change without notice. TI grants you permission to use these resources only for development of an 
application that uses the TI products described in the resource. Other reproduction and display of these resources is prohibited. No license 
is granted to any other TI intellectual property right or to any third party intellectual property right. TI disclaims responsibility for, and you 
will fully indemnify TI and its representatives against, any claims, damages, costs, losses, and liabilities arising out of your use of these 
resources.
TI’s products are provided subject to TI’s Terms of Sale or other applicable terms available either on ti.com or provided in conjunction with 
such TI products. TI’s provision of these resources does not expand or otherwise alter TI’s applicable warranties or warranty disclaimers for 
TI products.
TI objects to and rejects any additional or different terms you may have proposed. IMPORTANT NOTICE
Mailing Address: Texas Instruments, Post Office Box 655303, Dallas, Texas 75265
Copyright © 2023, Texas Instruments Incorporated
